---
layout: page
title: Clout Atlas Proposal
nav_title: Proposal
permalink: /proposal/
---

We’ve [submitted a proposal](https://www.newschallenge.org/challenge/elections/entries/san-francisco-clout-atlas-combining-lobbying-campaign-finance-and-legislation-data-to-map-political-influence-in-the-city) for the the 2015 [Knight News
Challenge](https://www.newschallenge.org/challenge/elections/brief.html).

<!-- TODO add proposal text. -->

Please support our proposal by applauding it, sharing it, or
[giving feedback](mailto:feedback@cloutatlas.org).

# San Francisco Clout Atlas - Combining Lobbying, Campaign Finance and Legislation data to Map Political Influence in the City

The City and County of San Francisco has long been a leader in transparency and
open government, with an extensive set of disclosure laws capturing information
ranging from campaign finance, lobbying of public officials, to details of city
contracts and conflict of interest statements from public officials. SF Clout
Atlas is an effort by **Code for San Francisco** (Code for America’s San Francisco
Brigade) with the full and committed support of the **San Francisco Ethics
Commission** to combine these disparate datasets into an accessible storytelling
web-app. It will allow the public, watchdog groups and the media, to quickly
gain insights into influence relationships, patterns of monetary contributions,
lobbying efforts and the legislative process in the city.

With this project we aim to increase the public’s engagement with local
elections by giving them a clear picture of the hidden dynamics of City
politics, putting them on equal footing with political insiders. We hope to
lower real and perceived informational barriers to tracking the legislative and
lobbying process. We will strive to empower the public by giving them access to
relevant information regarding the conduct of public official in an easily
graspable format, allowing them to more easily hold their public official
accountable. We believe this will help foster a political environment where the
public feels informed, engaged and empowered, and officials behave in an
ethical and transparent manner.

As the city with headquarters of well known global corporations like Twitter,
Salesforce, Instagram, Yelp, as well as new fast growing multi-nationals like
Airbnb and Uber, San Francisco’s disclosure policies and its political
environment have an impact beyond the region. The policies and the local
environment serve as the template for what corporate leaders, and newly minted
millionaires and billionaires of these companies will and should come to expect
as baseline standards of government transparency, political participation and
fair play.

## In one sentence, describe your idea as simply as possible.

An easily navigable storytelling web application that allows the public,
watchdog groups and the media to quickly gain insights into influence
relationships, patterns of monetary contributions, lobbying efforts and the
legislative process in the city.

## Briefly describe the need that you're trying to address.

The city of San Francisco, collects and publishes a variety of datasets on
campaign finance, lobbying, city contracts, behest payments etc. Although all
of this information is currently made available online, gaining meaningful
insights from this data, like finding a straightforward answer to the
question, “Did, my district Supervisor behave in a fair and ethical manner, or
was he or she, influenced by the interests of a major donor?” Would require
considerable amount of effort, resources and knowledge to synthesize and
analyze.

This web application will make it a lot easier to find answers to such questions.


## What progress have you made so far?

For the 2014 election, with support from the SF Ethics Commission, we released
a campaign finance data visualization web app, [http://transparentvoting.com](http://transparentvoting.com),
focused on the Board of Supervisor elections and Ballot Measures. Since the
election, our team has met weekly to run data exploration experiments combining
multiple datasets. Effort is already underway to merge legislations data, with
lobbying data and campaign finance data. In addition we have, had success
enriching local data with data available at the state level to find greater
visibility into entities engaged in local election spending and fundraising.


## What would be a successful outcome for your project?

This project has two goals.

The first, is to create an easily navigable storytelling web application that
allows the public, watchdog groups and the media, to quickly gain insights into
influence relationships, patterns of monetary contributions, lobbying efforts
and the legislative process in the city for the 2015 elections and beyond. The
success of the app will be gauged by traffic analytics, api usage, social
shares, and media mentions during the lead up to 2015 election.

The second is to create a report on the methodologies we will be using to
combine and analyze the existing datasets. From our experience building the
previous web app, and current efforts at combining the datasets, we expect to
discover opportunities to improve the quality of existing datasets, and useful
ways to combine datasets. The report will be an accounting of, “what we did”,
“what worked” and “what did not work.” It will serve as a feedback for SF
Ethics Commission, as well as a “playbook” for other local jurisdictions. We
hope the report will showcase what might be possible if other California
jurisdictions follow suite and adopt SF’s disclosure laws and open data
policies.

## The Team

**Asha John** - Team Lead. Frontend and Data Visualization developer. Created
Campaign Finance Data Visualization for Votetocracy.com.

**Peter Hall** - Software engineer, project member for Open Disclosure SF.

**Sean Finney** - Backend / Site Reliability engineer, project member for Open
Disclosure in SF.

**Aaron Borden** - Web developer, community organizer for One Laptop Per Child
San Francisco. Former developer with SFBrigade’s Open Ballot.

## Supporters and Advisors 

**Jesse Mainardi** - Deputy Executive Director, San Francisco Ethics Commission.

**Steven Massey** - Information Technology Officer, San Francisco Ethics
Commission.


## Main Features of the App

### Top 10 Rankings

#### Most powerful Individuals 

Ranking of City Officials, Lobbyists and Campaign Consultants based on a
composite index of data from Campaign Finance, Lobbying and City Contract Data.

#### Most powerful Organizations 

Ranking of Corporations, Lobbying groups, Nonprofits, Campaign Committees based
on a composite index of data from Campaign Finance, Lobbying and City Contract
Data.

### Profile Page 

Every relevant individual and organization in the combined dataset will have a
profile page. The page will show details relevant to that entity, whether it is
donations or lobbying or role as a political consultant etc. Related entities
will be cross-linked.

### Legislations in Context

The section on legislations will combine lobbying data, campaign finance data
and city legislation data to show, who is lobbying for a legislation, how the
board of supervisors voted, whether there was any connection between lobbying,
campaign contributions and votes cast.

### Stories of Significance

A series of interactive stories, that emerge from the analysis, and deserve a
higher level of public attention. These could be a story about relationships
between individuals and patterns of contributions such as a tech venture
capitalists who is a major donor and lobbying efforts that might benefit his or
her tech investment.

### Additional Features

**API** - We will make the data we generate usable via an API.

**Embed Feature** -  Other websites will be able to include select
visualizations and interactive features in their website using this. It will
allow local blogger, small media outlets and others to share stories and
insights we generate with their audience.

**Social Share** - Various stories will be made sharable via social media such
as Facebook, Twitter etc. This will enable ordinary citizens to engage with
each other using the insights we generate.

**The Report** - An accounting of “what we did”, “what worked”, and “what did
not.”

## Collaborations

We are collaborating with Code for America brigades in Oakland, Sacramento and
San Jose, on the [Open Disclosure
California](https://www.newschallenge.org/challenge/elections/entries/open-disclosure-california-connecting-people-to-their-local-campaign-finance-data)
project.  We are also organizing and hosting a [Campaign Finance
Summit](http://www.meetup.com/Code-for-San-Francisco-Civic-Hack-Night/events/220439038/)
with these brigades, that will bring together various stakeholders, including,
journalists and advocacy organizations.
